>> Hey! Welcome back to the Haskell Weekly
podcast.
I'm your host Taylor Fausak. I'm the
lead engineer here at ITProTV and with
me today is Sara Lichtenstein, one of
the engineers on my team. Welcome Sara!
>> Thank you!
>> We have been off for the past
three weeks while our studios have been
renovated but it's good to be back. Thank
you for your patience and thanks for
listening. Today we're going to be
talking about an article by Type Classes
called "Rounding". It was published way
back on August 14th and we put it in
issue 172 of Haskell Weekly. But it was
an interesting article and Sara could
you tell us a little about why you chose
to talk about it today?
>> Sure! So I'm sure
everyone has experienced this who's
worked in Haskell before where you go on
to Stackage or Hoogle and are trying to
look up a function to use and there's like
four or five different functions with
the same type signature and you're like,
"What do I do now?" because they all do
completely different things and this
article covers four of those functions.
>> Exactly. And although all four of those
functions come from the wonderfully
named RealFrac type class which as you
might guess from the name is for types
that are both real and fractional. But
what does real mean? It's not like not
imaginary I guess. Is there a better way
to put it than that?
>> I think that is the best way to put it.
Real like from math class.
Real numbers.
>> Yeah! I think we all learned
about this in math, maybe high school? I
don't remember. It's been a long time. And
then fractional, it means that it
supports division although it's not
necessarily rational numbers so a lot of
the RealFrac type classes can represent
things like pi which is not rational.
>> But it is real.
>> It is real, and it is frac. So yeah that's
the type class that we're kind of
talking about in general today but the
four functions in particular are: ceiling,
floor, truncate, and unsurprisingly round,
since the whole article is called
rounding. But Sara could you walk us
through ceiling. What is it?
>> Sure! So
ceiling is a function that takes one
integer and goes up to the next one. So
if you have something like 2.1 and you
ceiling on it
get 3.
>> Mm-hmm. And what happens if the
number is negative?
>> Back to the same next
integer. So negative numbers are a little
opposite so it always looks weird when
you see that. So for that same example
if you have a -2.1 it
goes to -2, because -2 is the
next number up.
>> Yeah and this usually
trips me up when I look at it because
when I see ceiling I think like it goes
to the next biggest number and I think
"Oh -2 the next biggest number
is obviously -3", but really
it's the next one like up.
>> In a positive
trend, yeah.
>> Going positive. And then you
mentioned at the top that a lot of these
functions have the same type
signature so floor has the exact same
type signature but it does something
kind of the opposite, right? What does it
do
>> It's basically the exact opposite so
it goes down to the next integer so in
that same example if we have 2.1
we get back 2 but if we have
-2.1 one that's where we
get -3.
>> Right, so exact
opposite but the type signature is
exactly the same so that's a little
strange.
>> Mm-hmm. We have to actually
do our reading.
>> Yeah!
Gah! The worst part, reading documentation.
And there's a couple more functions with
the same type signature so there's
truncate. What does that one do?
>> So
truncate just cuts off the fractional
part so in our 2.1 example we get 2
and in -2.1 we get
-2 so we can visualize this
kind of like a chain saw just slicing
off that number at the decimal.
>> Yeah I
always like to think about numbers and
chain saws at the same time they go
together so well.
>> Exactly
it really makes math interesting.
>> Very
visual and yeah truncate is pretty
interesting because you could implement
it in terms of ceiling and floor where
if your number is positive you're gonna
do floor but if it's negative you're
gonna do ceiling.
>> Exactly
>> I don't know
that it's actually implemented that way
but it really helps me visualize when
I'm not thinking about chain saws a
different way to to think about this one
>> Mm-hmm
basically if you have a handle and
ceiling in floor than you know truncate
>> There you go
and on to the most interesting one now
that this whole article is about which
is round I think we can all kind of
guess what this one does based on the
name and our kind of elementary school
math but could you tell us exactly what
it is that it does
>> Right so round as context clues would
assume goes to the nearest integer so in
our 2.1 example for +2.1 we get
2 and for -2.1 we get -2
however round has this fun thing once
you get to the point 5s that has the
statisticians rounding.
>> Mm-hmm
>> If you
have something like 2.5 it's gonna go
just to the next even number so from 2.5
you won't get 3 you'll get 2.
>> Right but
then with like 3.5 what happens you go
to 3?
>> You get 4.
>> You go to 4, okay.
>> 3's not even
>> So only the even numbers
get rounded to on the point 5s
>> Correct
>> yeah you mentioned this is statisticians
rounding I've also heard it called
bankers rounding I'm sure there are more
terms for it yeah it can be a little
surprising because usually for me at
least I've thought of the point fives
rounding up but now they round to the
even numbers alright sure why not
>> Yeah I mean
in like elementary school math they'd
always tell you if it's above if it's
point 5 or above you go up so now it's
like okay gotta relearn math
>> Yeah thanks
elementary school for lying to us
so yeah round is again kind of the most
complicated one among these functions
and in general the way that I think
about it day to day is it takes some
kind of fractional real number RealFrac
and goes into some integral number like
you know an int or an integer or a word
or a natural something like that so it's
a pretty robust function it will do a
lot of different conversions for you I
just mentioned integral and I think that
kind of dovetails nicely with a function
that can go in the other direction from
the integral type class which is
obviously the type class in Haskell for
integers and there's a function for that
one called fromIntegral where you give
it some integral type like int or
natural or whatever and it converts it
into some numeric type so not even RealFrac
just any number basically it could
be a complex number could be an
imaginary number but yeah it's a
real Swiss Army knife of a conversion
function because it goes from so many
types to so many other types
>> It's such a
perfect descriptor for that function because you
really do use it for basically any
conversions
in math at least here
>> Mm-hmm yeah we
have this this Swiss Army knife when we
pull out the blade that goes double to
int or sorry the other way around int to
double we pull out the blade that goes natural
to float not that you should probably do
that conversion in particular but anyway
>> we don't recommend that
>> We use it all
the time
>> But we'll get back to that in
just a sec I think I want to loop back
on what you said at the top of the show
about these kind of all having the same
type signature but different
implementations so we have to go read
the documentation and you had a great
term for this what did you call it
>> So
this kind of reminded me of homophones
from English so homophones for words
are words that sound the same but mean
different things
>> Exactly
>> So this is kind
of like
>> The progamming version of the same thing
>> These are our coding homophones
>> Exactly
>> We have some other good examples in
the prelude as well if you want to talk
about some of those
>> Sure there's one
that deals or there's two I should say
the deal with lists and we're going to
talk about a couple examples but there
are probably hundreds of these things
functions that have the same type
signature but have different
implementations and the first ones that
kind of popped into our head were head
and last for lists where head will take
in a list and give you an element from
it the first element last will take in a
list and give you the last element from
it so they have the exact same type
signature but very different
implementations and again you have to
just go read the documentation or you
might be able to tell from the names
what they do
>> Right it's always funny to me when we have to read the
documentation for these things since
Haskell is so lazy but then we can't be
that lazy
>> Yep yep and you know that's
where good names come in because then
you hopefully don't have to read the
documentation but then you might get
caught up on something like rounding and
think you know how it works and
>> And then
you don't
>> And then you don't but there are some
other ones some other examples of this
right that's especially ones that deal
with numbers could you talk about some
of those
>> Yeah so there are two other
great math examples so max and min that
are in the prelude max obviously gets
the maximum and min obviously gets the minimum and luckily
those two have descriptive enough names
where at least for me I'm not going to need
to go and look at documentation I can
kind of infer what those do
>> Mmm-hmm even
though they have the same type signature
unless the person that wrote them is
trying to trick us we can probably
guess what they're doing
>> Which hopefully
no one who writes things is trying to trick us
>> yeah a lot of things start to fall apart
if that happens so we've been talking
about these kind of coding homophones do
you feel like it these come up because
they're type signatures are the same but
their implementations can differ do you
feel like it's worth it in general to
try to make their types different by
introducing like a bunch of new type
wrappers or type aliases or something or
is it just kind of that cost of doing
business we have to deal with these
>> Well
I think it's kind of situational for
example when we're doing something like
fromIntegral I know that we like to
make wrappers and functions and things
that we can use to make that more
suitable for us that way we don't get as
many errors and stuff like that but
sometimes it's just as easy to use these
polymorphic functions
>> Mm-hmm yeah and
you mentioned that we sometimes use kind
of monomorphic versions of fromIntegral
and I'm sure our code base is littered
with things like intToDouble equals
fromIntegral or naturalToFloat equals
from integral
>> I think just
yesterday I did doubleToNatural which
was fromIntegral
>> yeah
and it can seem kind of silly to define
all of these functions that are just
different names for this existing
polymorphic one but the benefit comes
like you said from really pinning down
the types that are involved so that if
you're doing a bigger computation
Haskell by default will just sort of
pick a type kind of arbitrarily in the
middle like oh you didn't tell me what
to use here so I'll use double and
that's glossing over a lot of details
but by using these monomorphic functions
we can make it really clear to the
reader of that code that this is the
type we want to use in between all these
other things without having to put any
explicit type signatures which can be a
little clunky
at the use site
>> Absolutely and it
definitely helps in our situation where
we have a handful of engineers and you
know if I'm going back to look at
somebody else's code if I don't know
what's going on it's gonna be really
difficult but if there's a function
that's just doubleToNatural I know
exactly what's happening yeah that's way
easier to read especially in contexts
like going through code review where you
may not have GHC running for that
particular chunk of code you're just
looking at it in a web browser and you
don't have to guess what type is coming
in on the left here and what type is
going out on the right it's very
from the name what's going on
>> Yeah
sometimes that explicitness is really
helpful
>> Mm-hmm
another area where it's helpful is when
you're looking for such a conversion
function and I know that we've run into
this a lot especially with the time
library where well I won't get into time
but even for like even for something
like doubleToInt I've seen that pop up
as a question like on Stack Overflow or
here with our team how do I go from this
type to that type because if you search
in Hoogle which is an amazing thing and
can give you a lot of great answers you
may not get an answer for that I haven't
actually done the search to see but if
you search for doubleToInt there
aren't many monomorphic functions with
that exact type signature but if you
know about round ceiling or truncate
all this stuff you would know to reach
for one of those because those two types
match up but by providing this
monomorphic version we can have
something to hang documentation on and
say hey this goes from double to int and
it rounds and watch out for this weird
even rounding that you may not be
familiar with
>> I think it really shows
first of all how versatile the prelude
can be and secondly how useful it is if
you kind of know those base functions
because you can turn anything into
anything pretty much
>> Mm-hmm yeah it's
it's remarkable and in addition to the
documentation it can be really useful
for people learning Haskell to find one
of those monomorphic functions like
double to int and then go look at the
definition of it and see that it's
doubleToInt equals round oh wow I
didn't know that they could do that so
it kind of teaches somebody while also
making the code clearer at the same time
which win/win as far as I'm concerned
>> exactly
>> so we've mentioned that we use
these functions a lot in our code base
to kind of help type inference and help
code review and stuff like that one
thing we didn't quite mention yet is
warnings so we compile everything with
the -Weverything flag which is a
little pedantic we do turn off some
things but GHC will actually warn you
when it chooses one of those type
defaults that I was talking about
earlier so if you have some big
computation and in the middle it just
decides to use double it'll warn you
about that so we use these monomorphic
functions to avoid those warnings
sometimes to really pin down yeah use
this type here I know that's that's what
you want to use and we'll say it
explicitly
>> and the best part about that is that GHC
does warn you so compilers real nice the
>> good friend of ours that GHC and just to
kind of give a little color commentary
here we went through and looked at how
often we use all these functions we've
been talking about in our code base and
from least popular to most popular they
are truncate with exactly one use case
floor with also one use case ceiling
with two so none of those three get used
very much in our code but then you get
to round and we've used that 31 times so
we reach for round frequently and a lot
of the places we reach for that are
defining another function so that this
count here doesn't include those other
functions like doubleToInt it's just
round and then going in the other
direction we use fromIntegral even more
36 times and again that we define a lot
of helper functions with FromIntegral so
these are conversion functions that we
reach for frequently and we use all the
time but it's been nice to do this deep
dive on them and really figure out you
know how they work and what they mean
and some interesting comparisons between
them with all these code homophones
>> absolutely
>> thankfully we've been able to
dive into all of this because of this
excellent article written by type
classes for those of you that haven't
heard about type classes it is run by
Chris Martin and Julie Moronuki and
it's a great service where they just put
out lots of interesting haskell
tutorials and kind of walkthroughs i
know they've done like how to write a
HTTP server basically from scratch which
is a really interesting little project
to work through so yeah they're cool
service you should go to check them out
at typeclasses.com they offer
subscriptions that are super cheap so
check them out
similarly we work for a company called
ITProTV who also provides training
we're more focused on IT skills and we
do video based training so you should
check us out as well go to itpro.tv as
you might guess we use Haskell on the
back end so that's why we're here doing
a podcast about it
yeah I think that about wraps it up
Sara any closing thoughts
>> I would
definitely recommend to anybody who's
listening to this to try out type
classes and try us out all this
information is very great and you can
learn a lot of stuff from both sources
so if you're interested in learning
here are all the learns
>> for sure all right well thank you for
listening to the haskell weekly podcast
and we'll see you again next week
see you guys